text|‘Dementia’ is an umbrella term that covers a number of degenerative neurological disorders that typically effect memory, language and reasoning abilities. In 2017, it was reported by Alzheimer’s Australia that there were more than 413,106 Australian’s living with dementia, a figure that is likely to grow to over one million people by the year 2056 (Alzheimer’s Australia, 2017). This growth is already placing increasing demand on the aged care industry.

Alongside cognitive challenges, people living with dementia also experience personality, mood and behavioural difficulties such as depression and agitation. However, antidepressants, anxiolytics and antipsychotics often used to treat depression and agitation in dementia are not always effective in reducing symptoms and can be associated with severe side effects (Sacchetti, Turrina, & Valsecchi, 2010). Thus there is a great need for carers of people with dementia to have access to non-drug interventions that can increase the quality of life of the individual and the caregiver.

Music is one of the most widely used non-drug interventions for people with dementia. Research has demonstrated that music can be a highly effective way to manage the symptoms of dementia when facilitated by a trained music therapist (Raglio et al., 2015). More recently, research has shifted to give greater emphasis to musical interventions that are not therapist led such as individual music listening with headphones.

While sessions with a trained music therapist, or active forms of musical engagement such as singing offer additional therapeutic benefits to merely listening to music, the advantage of using pre-recorded music is that it can be used as frequently as needed in a variety of settings, and is relatively low cost. Research shows that listening to pre-recorded music can improve a range of psychological symptoms including agitation, anxiety and depression. However, music does not have a universally positive effect, and needs to be selected carefully to obtain the greatest therapeutic benefits (Garrido et al., 2017).

The aim of this guide is to help caregivers who are not trained music therapists to understand how to use pre-recorded music in targeted ways to address various challenges to care, and how to identify and manage music use for individuals who are prone to negative responses.


***There is evidence that using pre-recorded music can help improve agitation, anxiety and depression in people with dementia***